<h1 id="long-tailed-and-thin-tailed-distributions">Appendix D - Long-Tailed and Thin-Tailed Distributions</h1>

<p>
In the main text, we introduced tail events and black swans, discussing their importance in the context of safety engineering. We briefly considered the differences between 
long-tailed and thin-tailed distributions, but did not go into much detail. In this appendix, we discuss the differences between the types of events that have long tails and 
the types of events that do not, building a more comprehensive understanding of the features of both types of events.</p>

<h2 id="long-tailed-distributions">Long-Tailed Distributions</h2>
<p><strong>In long-tailed distributions, extreme occurrences can have a
huge effect.</strong> Long-tailed distributions are those where values
can vary so much that a single extreme instance or a few extreme
instances can dominate the total value. In other words, the top few
instances have a highly disproportionate impact. We will now explore
some examples of variables with long-tailed distributions.<p>
<em>Book sales</em>: Around 0.2% of books account for around 50% of
total book sales. It is possible for a single, highly popular book to
sell many more copies than many less popular books combined. Such a book
might be termed a tail event within book sales.<p>
<em>Music</em>: Around 1% of artists in the music industry earn around
77% of the total revenue from all recorded music. A single, highly
successful artist can earn much more than many lesser-known artists
combined.<p>
<em>Net worth</em>: Wealth distribution is a classic example of a
long-tailed distribution. Global wealth reports frequently find that the
richest 1% of people own close to half of the world’s total
wealth.<p>
<em>Web hits</em>: There are around 200 million actively maintained
websites on the internet, but the vast majority receive very few
visitors. A single, highly popular website, such as YouTube or Facebook,
can receive many more visitors per day than many obscure websites put
together.<p>
<em>Earthquake magnitude</em>: The frequency distribution of earthquake
magnitudes is described by the Gutenberg-Richter law. The exact
distribution depends on the region and conditions, but typically, there
are around 10,000 times more earthquakes of magnitude 3.0 or above than
earthquakes of magnitude 7.0 or above. However, a single magnitude-7
earthquake can do much more damage than all the magnitude-3 earthquakes
combined.<p>
<em>Crater diameter</em>: Most impact craters, resulting from collisions
with other astronomical bodies, are relatively small. Out of around 200
such craters discovered on Earth, about 120 are between 0 km and 10 km
in diameter, while fewer than 10 have a diameter of 100 km or more.
Moreover, the 5% largest craters have a combined diameter of around a
third of the total diameter of all craters.<p>
<em>Solar flares</em>: Solar flares of relatively low intensity are
quite common, while solar flares of much higher intensity happen
infrequently. However, studies have found that the few large flares
mostly determine the total energy of all flares.<p>
<em>Word frequency</em>: The vast majority of words in a given text
appear infrequently. However, certain words, like “the,” “of,” and
“and,” appear far more frequently than most others. The total
appearances of a handful of these commonplace words can outweigh the
total appearances of a large number of rarer words.<p>
These variables are said to have a long tail because, in their frequency
distributions, the rare, extreme events appear at very large values of
x; the “tail” of the graph extends far along the x-axis. This is also
why rare, high-impact events are called tail events; they exist in the
tail end of a long-tailed distribution.<p>
This type of phenomenon is sometimes referred to as the “Pareto
principle” or “the 80-20 rule.” This asserts that, in many
distributions, 20% of the instances contribute 80% of the total outcome.
The exact figures depend on the variable, but the 80-20 rule is a
well-known framing of the general concept of long-tailed
distributions.</p>
<h2 id="thin-tailed-distributions">Thin-tailed distributions</h2>
<p><strong>In thin-tailed distributions, no event is extreme enough to
have much effect.</strong> Thin-tailed distributions are those with
relatively little variation between values, meaning that even the most
extreme instances cannot substantially affect the overall landscape.
Many human characteristics, such as height, general intelligence, and
lifespan, have thin-tailed distributions. Note that these examples all
follow something akin to a normal distribution, or bell curve, as shown
in Figure 4.12. Normal distributions have a maximum density at the most common
value and a tail on either side. The frequency decreases rapidly as we
move away from the most common value.</p>
<figure id="fig:excess">
<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/WilliamHodgkins/AISES/main/images/heights_v2.png" class="tb-img-full" style="width: 70%"/>
<p class="tb-caption">Figure 4.12: Many natural phenomena (such as the distribution of humans’ heights) follow the normal
distribution.</p>
<!--<figcaption>Normal distribution: human heights.<p>-->
</figcaption>
</figure>
<p>All of these example characteristics vary between individuals, but
the range of variation is much narrower than it is for variables with
long-tailed distributions. For example, while human height varies, there
has never been a person who was fifty feet tall. Even the tallest person
in the world is not ten times taller than the shortest. This contrasts
with long-tailed distributions such as book sales, where a bestseller
can easily sell thousands of times more copies than a less popular
book.<p>
Following on from this, under thin-tailed distributions, no single
instance is so extreme that it can account for a large share of the
total among a group; the total height of the tallest 10% of people will
not be significantly more than 10% of the total height of all people.
Again, this contrasts with long-tailed distributions, where a small
fraction of instances can account for most of the impact.<p>
Thin-tailed distributions are so-called because, in their frequency
distributions, the value on the y-axis rapidly approaches zero for
highly extreme events; the “tail” of the graph quickly becomes
vanishingly thin.</p>
<h2
id="heuristics-and-models-for-thinking-about-long-tails-and-thin-tails"> Heuristics
and Models for Thinking About Long Tails and Thin Tails</h2>
<p><strong>Generally, long-tailed variables span orders of magnitude and
thin-tailed ones do not.</strong> A general rule of thumb for
distinguishing between long-tailed and thin-tailed variables is to ask:
Does it still make sense if we add a zero at the end of a data point’s
value? In other words, can the variable span multiple orders of
magnitude? If the answer is no, it is more likely to be thin-tailed; if
yes, the variable is more likely to be long-tailed.<p>
We should note that this test is imperfect. Lifespan is a thin-tailed
variable that spans orders of magnitude; some live to be over 100 years
old, while others live for fewer than ten years. Nonetheless, this
question usually indicates whether a variable has a long or thin
tail.<p>
</p>
<div>
<figure>
    <img
    src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/WilliamHodgkins/AISES/main/images/exp_vs_power_v2.png"
    style="width:70%" class="tb-img-full"/>
    <p class="tb-caption">Figure 4.13: Exponential distributions are not longtailed, even though they look quite similar at a normal
scale (top). Looking at extreme values (middle), especially on a log scale (bottom), shows us that they have thin tails.</p>
</figure>
</div>
<p><strong>Exponential distributions are thin-tailed
distributions.</strong> Figure 4.13 shows
an exponential distribution (in black) and a power-law distribution (in
grey). At first glance, they look quite similar. However, in the second
and third graphs, we zoom in to the tail end of the graph and change the
y-axis to a logarithmic scale. Here, we can see that, beyond a certain
point, the exponential distribution decays significantly more quickly
than the power-law distribution. As a rough heuristic, frequency
distributions that decay more slowly than an exponential are generally
considered long-tailed, while those that decay more quickly are
considered thin-tailed.</p>
<p><strong>There is a significant difference between extreme events
being unlikely and astronomically unlikely.</strong> In practical terms,
foreventswith exponential distributions—and distributions that decay
more quickly than them—the probability of extreme events rapidly becomes
astronomically small. In fact, it becomes so small that, at some point,
we can consider it essentially zero. Under distributions that decay more
slowly than exponentials, such as the power law depicted, the
probability of extreme events is still low. The important difference,
however, is that they are possible. Under long-tailed distributions,
they are rare but possible and have an enormous impact if they
happen.<p>
Note that the frequency of extreme events depends on how we define
“extreme,” namely, how far along the x-axis the event appears. We use
“extreme” to describe events so far from the most common value that they
can significantly impact the mean and represent a disproportionately
large fraction of the total.<p>
Returning to the risk equation, under thin-tailed distributions, the
probability, <span class="math inline"><em>P</em></span>(hazard), of a
tail event is so astronomically small that tail events do not affect the
total risk much. Under long-tailed distributions, the probability, <span
class="math inline"><em>P</em></span>(hazard), of a tail event is small,
but the severity is so large that tail events can substantially alter
the total risk.<p>
<span
class="math display">Risk(hazard) = <em>P</em>(hazard) × severity(hazard)</span></p>
<p>Next, we will consider three specific differentiators of long- and
thin-tailed distributions: excess conditional expectation,
multiplicative vs. additive phenomena, and preferential attachment.</p>
<p><strong>Excess conditional expectation is the margin between minimum
and actual values.</strong> Another difference between long-tailed and
thin-tailed distributions is the “excess conditional expectation” <span
class="citation" data-cites="Marsden2017">[3]</span>. This is the
difference between the conditional expectation–—our best guess of how
large something will be, given that we know that it is already above or
below some threshold—–and the threshold itself. Only long-tailed
distributions tend to have high excess conditional expectation. This
concept is best illustrated with examples.</p>
<p><strong>Example: Long Jump, Thin Tails.</strong> Imagine we are at a
training session for long-jump athletes. The world record for the long
jump is around 9 meters. If an athlete jumps 7 meters at the training
session, then this represents a definite lower bound for their personal
best: it is at least 7 meters. If we are then asked to guess their
actual personal best, we might estimate that it could be close to 8
meters.<p>
If another athlete jumps 8 meters at the training session, then we might
expect that their personal best is around 8.5 meters. If yet another
athlete jumps 8.5 meters, then we might think their personal best is
around 8.7 meters.<p>
Figure 4.14 shows a plot of the observed jumps as
blue dots, and our best guess of each athlete’s personal best in dotted
lines. Notice how, as the definite minimum value increases, we observe a
shrinking margin between this lower bound and our estimate of the
athlete’s actual maximum jump. This is because we know that the world
record sets a definite limit on what any individual’s personal best
could be. The closer the observed distance gets to the world record, the
less room there is for the athlete to have jumped further.</p>
<p><strong>Under thin tails, excess conditional expectation shrinks as
values get more extreme.</strong> The margin between the known lower
bound of something and the estimate of its actual value is the excess
conditional expectation. Under thin-tailed distributions, this margin
tends to shrink as the minimum value becomes more extreme. This is
because there is a limit to how extreme it can become; as the lower
bound approaches that limit, there is less room for the actual value to
be different.<p>
</p>
<figure id="fig:excess">
<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/WilliamHodgkins/AISES/main/images/excess_exp_v2.png" class="tb-img-full" style="width: 90%"/>
<p class="tb-caption">Figure 4.14: Our excess conditional expectation when observing long jumps (thin-tailed) shrinks as
the jump gets better. By contrast, our excess conditional expectation when observing the lifespan of
a book (long-tailed) gets larger as the book remains popular for longer.</p>
<!--<figcaption>Head and tail of a distribution</figcaption>-->
</figure>
<p><strong>Example: Lindy Effect, Long Tails.</strong> The Lindy Effect
is the theory that, for certain types of entities, such as technologies
and ideas, the longer they have been around, the longer we can expect
them to survive into the future <span class="citation"
data-cites="ord2023lindy">[4]</span>.<p>
For example, if a book has been in print for two years, then it might
remain in print for another two years. However, most books do not “stand
the test of time,” so we might not expect it to survive another 100
years. Meanwhile, if another book has already been in print for 100
years, then we might well expect it to remain so for another 100 because
it has showed it is robust to the test of time; if it has already
remained relevant and interesting for a long time, then it is more
likely to continue to do so for a long time into the future.<p>
Figure 4.14 shows some hypothetical observations
of the current ages of books as blue lines, and our estimate of what
their actual lifespan will be in dotted lines. Notice how, as the known
lower bound of lifespan increases, the amount of additional time we
expect a book to survive also increases.</p>
<p><strong>Under long tails, excess conditional expectation grows as
values become more extreme.</strong> Under long tails, values of
individual occurrences can grow much more extreme compared to the
majority. There is not usually as clear a limit on long-tailed variables
as on thin-tailed variables, so there is more room for the actual value
to differ from the known minimum value, even if the latter is already
extreme.<p>
To differentiate between thin- and long-tailed distributions, we have
now explored excess conditional distribution, a measure of the
difference between our expectation of real-world values and the
thresholds we observe them to exceed. Next, we will consider how
variables arise: multiplicatively or additively.</p>
<p><strong>Multiplicative and additive phenomena</strong> One factor in
determining whether a variable is likely to have a long-tailed or
thin-tailed distribution is whether it arises from a multiplicative or
additive phenomenon. We will now look at the differences between these
two categories of phenomena and why they affect how extreme a variable
can become.</p>
<p><strong>With multiplicative phenomena, one instance can multiply
rapidly, triggering a cascade.</strong> When something is a
multiplicative phenomenon, individual instances are not independent of
one another. Virus infections are a classic example of this; one
infection is likely to seed several more infections, each of which can
go on to cause even more. Thus, a single infection can trigger a
cascade, so a virus outbreak has the potential to scale up considerably.
This is part of the reason why virus outbreaks have a long-tailed
distribution, with pandemics representing tail events.</p>
<p><strong>With additive phenomena, individual instances do not tend to
multiply.</strong> When something is an additive phenomenon, individual
events are largely independent of one another. Broken bones are an
example of this; one person falling and breaking a bone does not usually
trigger a cascade of other people falling and breaking bones. There may
be instances where multiple broken bones occur together, for example in
a car accident. However, in general, they are independently caused and
do not have the potential to scale up as an infectious disease can. This
means that tail events do not generally happen with this phenomenon;
there is no single event where so many bones are broken that it
significantly affects the average number of bones broken in
accidents.</p>
<p><strong>A high level of connectedness in a system gives rise to long
tails.</strong> Another way of thinking about this is to consider the
level of connectedness in the relevant system. Since viruses are
infectious, instances of infection are strongly connected to one
another. Broken bones are not infectious, so instances of them are
relatively isolated from one another.<p>
We have seen that multiplicative phenomena are much more likely to
result in long-tailed variables than additive ones. Next, we discuss
another model which gives rise to long tails: preferential
attachment.</p>
<p><strong>In preferential attachment processes, the more someone has,
the more they will receive.</strong> Preferential attachment processes
are mechanisms where the amount extra of something that an individual
will receive is positively correlated with the amount they already have.
This is also known as the “rich get richer” effect because it is often
illustrated with the example of wealth distribution; the more money a
person already has, the more money they can invest, and thus the more
additional money they can make through returns on their investments.</p>
<p>This effect applies to many phenomena within social systems. For
example, if an author already has a lot of readers, there are more
people who are likely to recommend their books to others. This author is
therefore likely to gain more additional readers than someone else who
starts out with fewer readers. Their sales can therefore snowball and
become a tail event in the context of book sales. Similar mechanisms can
also explain why a few social media platforms vastly outperform others,
and why a few scientific papers receive many more citations than
most.</p>
<p><strong>Preferential attachment processes give rise to long tails
<span class="citation" data-cites="Marsden2017">[3]</span>.</strong> In
situations where preferential attachment processes take place, events
are not independent of one another. This is why things like book sales
and wealth acquisition are multiplicative phenomena, where a single
event can escalate to become much larger than most. By extension, this
is why preferential attachment processes can produce long-tailed
distributions.</p>
