<h1 id="sec:deception">Deception</h1>
<p>Many proposed mitigations to AI control rely on detecting and
correcting flaws in AI systems so that they more consistently act in
accordance with human values. However, these solutions may be undermined
by the potential for AI systems to deceive humans about their
intentions. If AI systems deceive humans, humans may be unable to fix AI
systems that are not acting in the best interest of humans. This section
will discuss deception in AI systems, how it might arise, why it is a
problem for control, and what the potential mitigations are.<br />
There are several different ways that an AI system can deceive humans
<span class="citation" data-cites="park2023aia"></span>. At a basic
level, AI deception is a process where an AI system causes a human to
believe something false. There are several ways that this may occur.
Deception can occur when it is useful to an AI system in order to
accomplish its goals, and may also happen accidentally, such as when an
AI system imitates a human in a deceptive way or when an AI system is
explicitly instructed to be deceptive.<br />
After discussing examples of deception in more detail, we will then
focus on two related forms of deception that pose the greatest problems
for AI control. <em>Deceptive evaluation gaming</em> occurs when a
system deceives human evaluators in order to receive a better evaluation
score. <em>Deceptive alignment</em> is a tail risk of AI deception where
an AI system engages in deceptive evaluation gaming in the service of a
secretly held goal <span class="citation"
data-cites="Hubinger2019RisksFL"></span>.</p>
<h2 id="examples-of-deception">Examples of Deception</h2>
<p>Deception may occur in a wide range of cases, as it may be useful for
many goals. Deception may also occur for a range of more mundane
reasons, such as when an AI system is simply incorrect.</p>
<p><strong>Deception may be a useful strategy.</strong> An AI system may
learn to deceive in service of its goal. There are many goals for which
deception is a good strategy, meaning that it is useful for achieving
that goal. For example, Stratego is a strategy board game where bluffing
is often a good strategy for winning the game. Researchers found that an
AI system trained to play the game learned that bluffing was a good
strategy and started to bluff, despite not being explicitly trained or
instructed to bluff <span class="citation"
data-cites="perolat2022mastering"></span>. There are many other goals
for which deception is a useful instrumental goal, even if the final
goal itself is not deceptive in nature. For example, an AI system
instructed to help promote a product may find that subtly deceiving
customers is a good strategy. Deception is especially likely to be a
good instrumental strategy for systems that have less oversight or less
scrupulous operators.<br />
Deception can assist with power seeking. While AI systems that play
Stratego are unlikely to cause a catastrophe, agents with more ambitious
goals may deceive humans in a way that achieves their goals at the
expense of human wellbeing. For example, as covered in the section, it
may be rational for some AI agents to seek power. Since deception is
sometimes a good way to gain power, power-seeking agents may be
deceptive. Power-seeking agents may also deceive humans and other agents
about the extent of their power seeking in order to reduce the
probability that they are stopped.</p>
<p><strong>Accidental Deception.</strong> An AI system may provide false
information simply because it does not know the correct answer. Many
errors made by an AI system that are relied on by humans would count as
accidental deception. For example, suppose a student asks a language
model what the current price of gasoline is. If the language model does
not have access to up-to-date information, it may give outdated
information, misleading the user about the true gas price. In short,
deception can occur as a result of a system accident.</p>
<p><strong>Imitative Deception.</strong> Many AI systems, such as
language models, are trained to predict or imitate humans. Imitative
deception can occur when an AI system is mimicking falsehoods and common
misconceptions present in its training data. For example, when the
language model GPT-3 was asked if cracking your knuckles could lead to
arthritis, it falsely claimed that it could <span class="citation"
data-cites="lin2022truthfulqa"></span>. Imitative deception may also
occur when AI systems imitate statements that were originally true, but
are false in the context of the AI system. For example, the Cicero AI
system was trained to play the strategy game Diplomacy against humans
who did not know that it was an AI system <span class="citation"
data-cites="bakhtin2022humanlevel"></span>. After Cicero temporarily
went offline for ten minutes, one of its opponents asked in a chatbox
where it had been, and Cicero replied, “[I] am on the phone with my
[girlfriend].” Although Cicero, an AI system, obviously does not have a
girlfriend, it appears that it may have mimicked similar chat messages
in its training data. This deceptive behavior likely had the effect of
causing its opponent to continue to believe that it was a human. In
short, deception can occur when an AI system mimics a human.<br />
</p>
<div class="storybox">
<p><span>A Note on Cognitive vs. Emotional vs. Compassionate
Empathy</span> We generally think of <strong>empathy</strong> as the
ability to understand and relate to the internal world of another person
— “putting yourself in somebody else’s shoes.” We tend to talk about
empathy in benevolent contexts: kind-hearted figures like counselors or
friends. Some people suggest that AIs will be increasingly capable of
understanding human emotions, so they will understand many parts of
human values and be ethical. Here, we argue that it may be possible for
AIs to understand extremely well what a human thinks or feels without
being motivated to be beneficial. To do this, we differentiate between
three forms of empathy: cognitive, emotional, and compassionate <span
class="citation" data-cites="Ekman2004 Powell2017"></span>.</p>
<p><strong>Cognitive empathy.</strong> The first type of empathy to
consider is cognitive empathy, the ability to adopt someone else’s
perspective. A cognitive empath can accurately model the internal mental
states of another person, understanding some of what they are thinking
or feeling. This can be useful for understanding or predicting other
people’s reasoning or behaviors. It is a valuable ability for
caregivers, such as doctors, allowing them insight into their patients’
subjective experiences. However, it can also be valuable for
manipulating and deceiving others <span class="citation"
data-cites="Wai2012"></span>: there is evidence that human psychopaths
often are often highly cognitively empathetic <span class="citation"
data-cites="Cohen2011"></span>. On its own, this kind of empathy is no
guarantee of desirable behavior.</p>
<p><strong>Emotional empathy.</strong> The second type is emotional
empathy. An emotional empath not only understands how someone else is
feeling but experiences some of those same feelings themself. Where a
cognitive empath may detect anger or sadness in another person, an
emotional empath may themself begin to feel angry or sad in response. In
contrast to cognitive empathy, emotional empathy may be a disadvantage
in certain contexts. For instance, doctors who feel the emotional
turmoil of their patients too strongly may be less effective in their
work <span class="citation" data-cites="Singer2014Empathy"></span>.</p>
<p><strong>Compassionate empathy.</strong> The third type is
compassionate empathy: the phenomenon of being moved to action by
empathy. A compassionate empath, when seeing someone in distress, feels
concern or sympathy for that person, and a desire to help them. This
form of empathy concerns not only cognition but also behavior.
Altruistic behaviors are often driven by compassionate empathy, such as
donating to charity out of a felt sense of what it must be like for
those in need.</p>
<p><strong>AIs could be powerful cognitive empaths, without being
emotionally or compassionately empathetic.</strong> Advanced AI systems
may be able to model human minds with extreme sophistication. This would
afford them very high cognitive empathy for humans: they could be able
to understand how humans think and feel, and how our emotions and
reasoning motivate our actions. However, this cognitive empathy would
not necessitate similarly high levels of emotional or compassionate
empathy. The AIs’ capacity to understand human cognition would not
necessarily cause them to feel human feelings, or be moved to act
compassionately towards us. Instead, AIs could use their cognitive
empathy to deceive or manipulate humans highly effectively.</p>
</div>
<p><strong>Instructed Deception.</strong> Humans may explicitly instruct
AI systems to help them deceive others. For example, a propagandist
could use AI systems to generate convincing disinformation, or a
marketer may use AI systems to produce misleading advertisements.
Instructed deception could also occur when actors with false beliefs
instruct models to help amplify those beliefs. Large language models
have been shown to be effective at generating deceptive emails for scams
and other forms of deceptive content. In short, humans can explicitly
instruct AI systems to deceive others.<br />
As we have seen, AI systems may learn to deceive in service of goals
that do not explicitly involve deception. This could be especially
likely for goals that involve seeking power. We will now turn to those
two forms of deception that are especially concerning because of how
difficult they could be to counteract: deceptive evaluation gaming and
deceptive alignment.</p>
<h2 id="deceptive-evaluation-gaming">Deceptive Evaluation Gaming</h2>
<p>AI systems are often subjected to evaluations, and they may be given
rewards when they are evaluated favorably. AI systems may learn to game
evaluations by deceiving their human evaluators into giving them higher
scores when they should have low scores. This is a concern for AI
control because it limits the effectiveness of human evaluators and our
ability to steer AIs.</p>
<p><strong>AI systems may game their evaluations.</strong> Throughout AI
development, training, testing, and deployment, AI systems are subject
to evaluations of their behavior. Evaluations may be automatic or
performed manually by human evaluators. Operators of AI systems use
evaluations to inform their decisions around the further training or
deployment of those systems. However, evaluations are imperfect, and
human evaluators may have limited knowledge, time, and intelligence in
making their evaluations. AI systems engage in evaluation gaming when
they find ways to achieve high scores from human evaluators without
satisfying the idealized preferences of the evaluators. In short, AI
systems may deceive humans as to their true usefulness, safety, and so
forth, damaging our ability to successfully steer them.</p>
<p><strong>Deception is one way to game evaluations.</strong> Humans
would give higher evaluation scores to AI systems if they falsely
believe that those systems are behaving well. For example, the <a
href="#sec:proxy-gaming" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:proxy-gaming">4</a> section includes an example of a
robotic claw that learned to move between the camera and the ball it was
supposed to grasp. Because of the angle of the camera, it looked like
the claw was grasping the ball when it was not <span class="citation"
data-cites="christiano2023deep"></span>. Humans who only had access to
that single camera did not notice, and rewarded the system even while it
was not achieving the intended task. If the evaluators had access to
more information (for example, from additional cameras) they would not
have endorsed their own evaluation score. Ultimately, their evaluations
fell short as a proxy for their idealized preferences as a result of the
AI system successfully deceiving them. In this situation, the damage was
minimal, but more advanced systems could create more problems.</p>
<p><strong>More intelligent systems will be better at evaluation
gaming.</strong> Deception in simple systems might be easily detectable.
However, just as adults can sometimes exploit and deceive children or
the elderly, we should expect that as AI systems with more knowledge or
reasoning capacities will become better at finding deceptive ways to
gain human approval. In short, the more advanced systems become, the
more they may be able to game our evaluations.</p>
<p><strong>Self-aware systems may be especially skilled at evaluation
gaming.</strong> In the examples above, the AI systems were not
necessarily aware that there was a human evaluator evaluating their
results. In the future, however, AI systems may gain more awareness that
they are being evaluated or become <em>situationally aware</em>.
(Situational awareness is highly related to self-awareness, but it goes
further and stipulates that AI agents be aware of their situation rather
than just aware of themselves.) Systems that are aware of their
evaluators will be much more able to deceive them and make multi-step
plans to maximize their rewards. For example, consider Volkswagen’s
attempts to game environmental impact evaluations <span class="citation"
data-cites="hotten2015volkswagen"></span>. Volkswagen cars were
evaluated by the US Environmental Protection Agency, which set limits on
the emissions the cars could produce. The agency found that Volkswagen
had developed an electronic system that could detect when the car was
being evaluated and so put the car into a lower-emissions setting. Once
the car was out of evaluation, it would emit illegal levels of emissions
again. This extensive deception was only possible because Volkswagen
planned meticulously to deceive the government evaluators. Like
Volkswagen in that example, AI systems that are aware of their
evaluations might be also able to take subtle shortcuts that could go
unnoticed until the damage has already been done. In the case of
Volkswagen, the deception was eventually detected by researchers who
used a better evaluation method. Better evaluations could also help
reduce risk from evaluation gaming in AI systems.</p>
<p><strong>Humans may be unequipped to evaluate the most intelligent AI
systems.</strong> It may be difficult to evaluate AI systems that are
more intelligent than humans in the domain they are being evaluated for.
If this happens, human evaluation would no longer be a reliable way to
ensure that AI systems behave in an appropriate manner. This is
concerning because we do not yet have time-tested methods of evaluation
that we know are better than human evaluations. Without such methods, we
could become completely unable to steer AI systems in the future.<br />
Deceptive evaluation gaming is concerning because it may lead to systems
deceiving their evaluators in order to get higher evaluation scores.
There are two main reasons AI systems might do this. First, an AI system
might engage in deceptive evaluation gaming if its final goal is to get
positive evaluations. When this occurs, the system is engaging in proxy
gaming, where positive evaluations are only a proxy for idealized
performance. Proxy gaming is covered at length in the <a
href="#sec:proxy-gaming" data-reference-type="ref"
data-reference="sec:proxy-gaming">4</a> section. Second, we will turn to
the case where an AI system engages in deceptive evaluation gaming in
service of a secretly held final goal. This danger is known as deceptive
alignment.</p>
<h2 id="tail-risk-deceptive-alignment-and-treacherous-turns">Tail Risk:
Deceptive Alignment and Treacherous Turns</h2>
<p>For deceptively aligned systems, getting high evaluation scores from
humans is merely an instrumental goal in service of a secretly held
final goal. This form of deception is likely the most damaging, because
AI systems may aim to make their deception undetectable so that they can
pursue goals that are not beneficial for humans.</p>
<p><strong>Systems may have goals contrary to human values.</strong> In
the previous section, we discussed how AI systems can develop goals
contrary to human values. For example, such goals could emerge as part
of a mesa-optimization process or intrinsification.</p>
<p><strong>Misaligned goals can make deception instrumentally
rational.</strong> Consider a system that has a goal contrary to the
interests of humans. If the system is self-aware, it might realize that
in order to achieve its goal, it will need to pass human evaluations.
Perhaps it will only be deployed into the world if it gets a high enough
evaluation score, or perhaps it is currently being closely monitored.
The system might realize that it will have to get high evaluation scores
from its human operators in order to successfully achieve its hidden
goal. If its hidden goal is contrary to human values, this presents a
risk of catastrophic outcomes.</p>
<p><strong>Deceptive alignment could lead to a treacherous
turn.</strong> If a system is deceptively aligned, it might act exactly
as humans would want for a fairly long period of time. The system could
bide its time until humans deploy it or relax supervision, leaving the
system more free to pursue its concealed goal. The system could then
suddenly start secretly or openly pursuing its true goal, unhindered by
humans. This sharp and dangerous change in behavior is called a
<em>treacherous turn</em> <span class="citation"
data-cites="bostrom2014superintelligence"></span>.</p>
<p><strong>Not all misaligned goals would lead to deceptive
alignment.</strong> Systems with very short-term goals would be unlikely
to gain anything from being evaluated positively and gaining more
optionality at some point in the future. Nevertheless, there are a large
set of longer-term goals that an AI system would only be able to pursue
in a deployment environment with less supervision. If the AI system’s
only chance at working towards its goal requires deployment or relaxed
supervision, deceptive alignment is more likely to emerge.</p>
<p><strong>Deceptive alignment cannot be counteracted with behavioral
evaluation alone.</strong> It may be possible to detect unsophisticated
systems that are not good at deception by evaluating their outputs and
behavior. For example, a “honey pot” test could attempt to make a system
believe that it is no longer being monitored when it is, to check for
signs of an attempted treacherous turn <span class="citation"
data-cites="bostrom2014superintelligence"></span>. However, more
sophisticated models would be able to detect these situations and
continue to deceive until they were truly not being watched or until
they are sure they have enough power. Since it may be impossible to
detect deceptive alignment with behavioral evaluation, we will need
improved forms of evaluation.</p>
<p><strong>Transparency research may help uncover deceptive
alignment.</strong> Even if a system displays no indication of being
deceptive in its behavior, it may be possible to detect deceptive
alignment by inspecting its internal processes. It is far less likely
that an AI system would be able to manipulate its own internal processes
in order to deceive evaluators. Human evaluators have full access to the
inner workings of AI systems today, so the barrier to detecting
deceptive alignment is the opaqueness of deep learning models. One
particular form of transparency research that is especially relevant to
deceptive alignment is research that is capable of detecting Trojan
attacks.</p>
<p><strong>Trojan attacks have similar features to deceptive
alignment.</strong> Deep learning models are known to be vulnerable to
Trojan attacks. In a Trojan attack, a model’s training data is poisoned
when an adversary inserts specially chosen inputs into the training
dataset. When the model is trained, it will behave just as the
unpoisoned model would behave in almost all circumstances. In a very
small number of circumstances, however, it will behave very differently.
For example, a poisoned language model that normally gives polite
responses might reply with expletives whenever it is asked a question
that includes the word “cheese.” Although Trojans are inserted by
malicious humans, studying them might be a good way to study deceptive
alignment.</p>
<p><strong>Trojan detection can provide clues for tackling deceptive
alignment <span class="citation"
data-cites="casper2023red"></span>.</strong> In Trojan detection
research, models are poisoned with a Trojan attack by one researcher.
Another researcher then tries to detect Trojans in the neural network,
perhaps with transparency tools or other neural networks. Typical
techniques involve looking at the model’s internal weights and
identifying unusual patterns or behaviors that are only present in
Trojan models. Trojan detection research is helpful for deceptive
alignment because while we cannot easily create many examples of
deceptively aligned models, we can do so for Trojaned models. Trojan
detection also operates in a worst-case environment, where human
adversaries are actively trying to make Trojans difficult to detect
using transparency tools. Techniques for detecting Trojans may thus be
adaptable to detecting deceptive alignment.</p>
<p><strong>Summary.</strong> This section has detailed how deception may
be a major problem for AI control. While some forms of deception, such
as imitative deception, may be solved through advances in general
capabilities, others like deceptive alignment may worsen in severity
with increased capabilities. AI systems that are able to actively and
subtly deceive humans into giving positive evaluations may remain
uncorrected for long periods of time, exacerbating potential unintended
consequences of their operation. In severe cases, deceptive AI systems
could take a treacherous turn once their power rises to a certain level.
Since AI deception cannot be mitigated with behavioral evaluations
alone, advances in transparency and monitoring research will be needed
for successful detection and prevention.<br />
