<h1 id="intrasystem-conflict">Appendix G - Intrasystem Conflict Causes</h1>
<p><strong>Intrasystem goal conflict may cause an AI system not to
behave as a unified agent.</strong>
<p><strong>Intrasystem goal conflict can arise through
modularization.</strong> There are two mechanisms by which intrasystem
goal conflict may arise. The first is <em>modularization</em>: a goal
may be broken down into components, each of which thus becomes a
sub-goal. For example, consider a multi-agent system, such as a
committee, which wishes to carry out a complicated big-picture goal. In
this case, they may break their goal up into subgoals, and delegate each
of these to “working groups” (different subsets of the committee). Each
working group now pursues solely its delegated sub-goal and the
different working groups compete with one another. Ultimately, this
modularity enables the different working groups to grow and change
independently of one another, and results in an uneven balance between
the different sub-goals. Thus, the big-picture goal is distorted.<p>
It is worth noting that some cases may differ from this story in terms
of their causality. Rather than a single complex goal being modularized,
sometimes individual agents may come together to form a coalition to
pursue a larger-scale goal. Misalignments of interests between these
agents can give rise to intrasystem goal conflict in these cases just as
with modularized systemic goals. Examples include gut bacterial
opportunistic pathogenicity, and some inter-sexual and intragenomic
conflict. For instance, intersexual conflict in animals has produced
species in which the males deliberately cause the females physical
damage when mating. This strategic harming hinders the female’s ability
to re-mate in future, and incentivizes her to allocate more resources
towards raising that particular male’s genetic offspring. Females have
in turn evolved defensive strategies against this, such as armor plating
and spines <span class="citation"
data-cites="morrow2003traumatic">[14]</span>. Intersexual coevolutionary
“arms races” such as these have been documented in a diverse range of
species, from ducks to fruit flies <span class="citation"
data-cites="rowe2002sexually">[15]</span>. Rather than a unified goal
being modularized, the goal conflict here has arisen in the context of a
coalition. The female and male are collaborating through sexual
reproduction, but even slight misalignments of their interests can
result in dramatic goal conflict.</p>
<p><strong>Intrasystem goal conflict can arise through
delegation.</strong> The second mechanism by which intrasystem goal
conflict may arise is in the <em>delegation</em> itself. In the above
example, the working groups each pursue their assigned sub-goal
faithfully. The problem is that the collective outcome of these
agencies, each optimizing for their assigned subgoal is a distorted
version of the original big-picture goal. However, the delegation of a
goal to another agent can also itself generate intrasystem goal
conflict.<p>
In economics, this is called the <strong>principal-agent
problem</strong>. Put simply, this is the problem of conflicting
priorities that arises when one party (the <em>principal</em>) delegates
a goal of theirs to another (the <em>agent</em>), who is not entirely
value-aligned with the <em>principal</em>. The <em>agent</em> has other
interests, such as self-preservation or gain of influence, which compete
with the goal the <em>principal</em> has delegated to them. This can
result in the distortion or subversion of the delegated goal: the agent
pursues their own goals as well as (or instead of) that of the
principal. Principal-agent problems are most common where there is a
knowledge asymmetry, such that the agent knows more about the relevant
matter than the principal. For example, consider a client who has hired
a mechanic to fix their car. The client wishes their car to be fixed as
cost-effectively as possible; the mechanic wishes to maximize their
profits. The principal-agent problem is thus that the client cannot
trust the mechanic to report the cost of the car fix accurately.<p>
Principal-agent problems can generate intrasystem goal conflict wherever
the components of a modularized big-picture goal are delegated to
sub-agents. In particular, the sub-agents are likely to be motivated by
self-preservation. If the goal the principal has delegated to them
clashes with their own goal of self-preservation, this can produce
strong intrasystem goal conflict. To build on the committee example
above, now consider that each working group is incentivized to compete
with the others to avoid being disbanded. Each exaggerates the
importance of their own work, or reconfigures their assigned objective
in order to achieve goals of their own. Ultimately, some even break away
from the committee, to pursue their emergent goals without the
constraints imposed by the committee from which they formed.<p>
Intrasystem goal conflict often arises when a system both modularizes
and delegates a complex goal. For example, the US Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) and the Department of Agriculture (USDA) are
sub-agencies of the same government <span class="citation"
data-cites="moss2010warning">[16]</span>. The US government delegates
sub-goals to each agency to carry out, yet sometimes their interests and
actions conflict with one another. In 2010, the USDA implemented a
marketing campaign to promote eating more cheese, to support the dairy
industry. Simultaneously, the FDA implemented a marketing campaign of
their own to promote eating less cheese, as part of an effort to reduce
the saturated fat content of American diets. Despite the fact that both
agencies were delegated sub-goals from the same government, their
conflicting objectives resulted in their taking actions that hindered
one another.</p>
