<h1 id="complex-systems-for-ai-safety"> 5.3 Complex Systems for AI
Safety</h1>
<h2 id="general-lessons-from-complex-systems"> 5.3.1 General Lessons from
Complex Systems</h2>
<p>As we have discussed, AI systems and the social systems they are
integrated within are best understood as complex systems. For this
reason, making AI safe is not like solving a mathematical problem or
fixing a watch. A watch might be <em>complicated</em>, but it is not
<em>complex</em>. Its mechanism can be fully understood and described,
and its behavior can be predicted with a high degree of confidence. The
same is not true of complex systems.<br />
Since a system’s complexity has a significant bearing on its behavior,
our approach to AI safety should be informed by the complex systems
paradigm. We will now look at some lessons that have been derived from
observations of many other complex adaptive systems. We will discuss
each lesson and what it means for AI safety.</p>
<h3 id="lesson-armchair-analysis-is-limited-for-complex-systems">Lesson:
Armchair Analysis Is Limited for Complex Systems</h3>
<p><strong>Learning how to make AIs safe will require some trial and
error.</strong> We cannot usually attain a complete understanding of
complex systems or anticipate all their emergent properties purely by
studying their structure in theory. This means we cannot exhaustively
predict every way they might go wrong just by thinking about them.
Instead, some amount of trial and error is required to understand how
they will function under different circumstances and learn about the
risks they might pose. The implication for AI safety is that some
simulation and experimentation will be required to learn how AI systems
might function in unexpected or unintended ways and to discover crucial
variables for safety.</p>
<p><strong>Biomedical research and drug discovery exemplify the
limitations of armchair theorizing.</strong> The body is a highly
complex system with countless biochemical reactions happening all the
time, and intricate interdependencies between them. Researchers may
develop a drug that they believe, according to their best theories,
should treat a condition. However, they cannot thoroughly analyze every
single way it might interact with all the body’s organs, processes, and
other medications people may be taking. That is why clinical trials are
required to test whether drugs are effective and detect any unexpected
side effects before they are approved for use.<br />
Similarly, since AI systems are complex, we cannot expect to predict all
their potential behaviors, emergent properties, and associated hazards
simply by thinking about them. Moreover, AI systems will be even less
predictable when they are taken out of the controlled development
environment and integrated within society. For example, when the chatbot
Tay was released on Twitter, it soon started to make racist and sexist
comments, presumably learned through its interactions with other Twitter
users in this uncontrolled social setting.</p>
<p><strong>Approaches to AI safety will need to involve
experimentation.</strong> Some of the most important variables that
affect a system’s safety will likely be discovered by accident. While we
may have ideas about the kinds of hazards a system entails,
experimentation can help to confirm or refute these. Importantly, it can
also help us discover hazards we had not even imagined. These are called
unknown unknowns, or black swans, discussed extensively in the chapter.
Empirical feedback loops are necessary.</p>
<h3
id="lesson-systems-often-develop-subgoals-which-can-supersede-the-original-goal">Lesson:
Systems Often Develop Subgoals Which Can Supersede the Original
Goal</h3>
<p><strong>AIs might pursue distorted subgoals at the expense of the
original goal.</strong> The implication for AI safety is that AIs might
pursue subgoals over the goals we give them to begin with. This presents
a risk that we might lose control of AIs, and this could cause harm
because their subgoals may not always be aligned with human values.</p>
<p><strong>A system often decomposes its goal into multiple subgoals to
act as stepping stones.</strong> Subgoals might include instrumentally
convergent goals, which are discussed in the chapter. The idea is that
achieving all the subgoals will collectively amount to achieving the
original aim. This might work for a simple, mechanistic system. However,
since complex systems are more than the sum of their parts, breaking
goals down in this way can distort them. The system might get
sidetracked pursuing a subgoal, sometimes even at the expense of the
original one. In other words, although the subgoal was initially a means
to an end, the system may end up prioritizing it as an end in
itself.<br />
For example, companies usually have many different departments, each one
specialized to pursue a distinct subgoal. However, some departments,
such as bureaucratic ones, can capture power and have the company pursue
goals unlike its initial one. Political leaders can delegate roles to
subordinates, but sometimes their subordinates may overthrow them in a
coup.<br />
As another example, imagine a politician who wants to improve the
quality of life of residents of a particular area. Increasing employment
opportunities often leads to improvement in quality of life, so the
politician might focus on this as a subgoal—a means to an end. However,
this subgoal might end up supplanting the initial one. For instance, a
company might want to build an industrial plant that will offer jobs,
but is also likely to leak toxic waste. Suppose the politician has
become mostly focused on increasing employment rates. In that case, they
might approve the construction of this plant, despite the likelihood
that it will pollute the environment and worsen residents’ quality of
life in some ways.</p>
<p><strong>Future AI agents may break down difficult long-term goals
into smaller subgoals.</strong> This might distort their objective and
result in misalignment. As discussed in the section of the Chapter,
optimization algorithms might produce emergent optimizers that pursue
subgoals, or AI agents may delegate goals to other agents and
potentially have the goal be distorted or subverted. In more extreme
cases, the subgoals could be pursued at the expense of the original one.
We can specify our high-level objectives correctly without any guarantee
that systems will implement these in practice. As a result, systems may
not pursue goals that we would consider beneficial.</p>
<h3
id="lesson-a-safe-system-when-scaled-up-is-not-necessarily-still-safe">Lesson:
A Safe System, When Scaled Up, Is Not Necessarily Still Safe</h3>
<p><strong>AIs may continue to develop unanticipated behaviors as we
scale them up.</strong> When we scale up the size of a system,
qualitatively new properties and behaviors emerge. The implication for
AI safety is that, when we increase the scale of a deep learning system,
it will not necessarily just get better at doing what it was doing
before. It might begin to behave in entirely novel and unexpected ways,
potentially posing risks that we had not thought to prepare for.<br />
It is not only when a system transitions from relative simplicity into
complexity that novel properties can appear. New properties can continue
to emerge spontaneously as a complex system increases in size. As
discussed earlier in this chapter, LLMs have been shown to suddenly
acquire new capabilities, such as doing three-digit arithmetic, when the
amount of compute used in training them is increased, without any
qualitative difference in training. Proxy gaming capabilities have also
been found to “switch on” at a certain threshold as the model’s number
of parameters increases; in one study, at a certain number of
parameters, the proxy reward steeply increased, while the model’s
performance as intended by humans simultaneously declined.</p>
<p><strong>Some emergent capabilities may pose a risk.</strong> As deep
learning models continue to grow, we should expect to observe new
emergent capabilities appearing. These may include potentially
concerning ones, such as deceptive behavior or the ability to game proxy
goals. For instance, a system might not attempt to engage in deception
until it is sophisticated enough to be successful. Deceptive behavior
might then suddenly appear.</p>
<h3
id="lesson-working-complex-systems-have-usually-evolved-from-simpler-systems">Lesson:
Working Complex Systems Have Usually Evolved From Simpler Systems</h3>
<p><strong>We are unlikely to be able to build a large, safe AI system
from scratch.</strong> Most attempts to create a complex system from
scratch will fail. More successful approaches usually involve developing
more complex systems gradually from simpler ones. The implication for AI
safety is that we are unlikely to be able to build a large, safe,
working AI system directly. As discussed above, scaling up a safe system
does not guarantee that the resulting larger system will also be safe.
However, starting with safe systems and cautiously scaling them up is
more likely to result in larger systems that are safe than attempting to
build the larger systems in one fell swoop.</p>
<p><strong>Building complex systems directly is difficult.</strong>
Since complex systems can behave in unexpected ways, we are unlikely to
be able to design and build a large, working one from scratch. Instead,
we need to start by ensuring that smaller systems work and then build on
them. This is exemplified by how businesses develop; a business usually
begins as one person or a few people with an idea, then becomes a
start-up, then a small business, and can potentially grow further from
there. People do not usually attempt to create multinational
corporations immediately without progressing naturally through these
earlier stages of development.<br />
One possible explanation for this relates to the limitations of armchair
theorizing about complex systems. Since it is difficult to anticipate
every possible behavior and failure mode of a complex system in advance,
it is unlikely that we will be able to design a flawless system on the
first attempt. If we try to create a large, complex system immediately,
it might be too large and unwieldy for us to make the necessary changes
to its structure when issues inevitably arise. If the system instead
grows gradually, it has a chance to encounter relevant problems and
adapt to deal with them during the earlier stages when it is smaller and
more agile.<br />
Similarly, if we want large AI systems that work well and are safe, we
should start by making smaller systems safe and effective and then
incrementally build on them. This way, operators will have more chances
to notice any flaws and refine the systems as they go. An important
caveat is that, as discussed above, a scaled-up system might have novel
emergent properties that are not present in the smaller version. We
cannot assume that a larger system will be safe just because it has been
developed in this way. However, it is more likely to be safe than if it
was built from scratch. In other words, this approach is not a guarantee
of safety, but it is likely our best option. The scaling process should
be done cautiously.</p>
<h3
id="lesson-any-system-which-depends-on-human-reliability-is-unreliable">Lesson:
Any System Which Depends on Human Reliability Is Unreliable</h3>
<p><strong>Gilb’s Law of Unreliability.</strong> We cannot guarantee
that an operator will never make an error, and especially not in a large
complex system. As the chemical engineer Trevor Kletz put it: “Saying an
accident is due to human failing is about as helpful as saying that a
fall is due to gravity. It is true but it does not lead to constructive
action” <span class="citation" data-cites="kletz2018engineer"></span>.
To make a complex system safer, we need to incorporate some allowances
in the design so that a single error is not enough to cause a
catastrophe.<br />
The implication of this for AI safety is that having humans monitoring
AI systems does not guarantee safety. Beyond human errors of judgment,
processes in some complex systems may happen too quickly for humans to
be included in them anyway. AI systems will probably be too fast-moving
for human approval of their decisions to be a practical or even a
feasible safety measure. We will therefore need other ways of embedding
human values in AI systems and ensuring they are preserved, besides
including humans in the processes. One potential approach might be to
have some AI systems overseeing others, though this brings its own
risks.</p>
<p><strong>Summary.</strong> The general lessons that we should bear in
mind for AI safety are:</p>
<ol>
<li><p>We cannot predict every possible outcome of AI deployment by
theorizing, so some trial and error will be needed</p></li>
<li><p>Even if we specify an AI’s goals perfectly, it may start not
pursue them in practice, as it may instead pursue unexpected, distorted
subgoals</p></li>
<li><p>A small system that is safe will not necessarily remain safe if
it is scaled up</p></li>
<li><p>The most promising approach to building a large AI that is safe
is nonetheless to make smaller systems safe and scale them up
cautiously</p></li>
<li><p>We cannot rely on keeping humans in the loop to make AI systems
safe, because humans are not perfectly reliable and, moreover, AIs are
likely to accelerate processes too much for humans to keep up.</p></li>
</ol>
<h2 id="puzzles-problems-and-wicked-problems"> 5.3.2 Puzzles, Problems, and
Wicked Problems</h2>
<p>So far, we have explored the contrasts between simple and complex
systems and why we need different approaches to analyzing and
understanding them. We have also described how AIs and the social
systems surrounding them are best understood as complex systems, and
discussed some lessons from the field of complex systems that can inform
our expectations around AI safety and how we address it.<br />
In attempting to improve the safety of AI and its integration within
society, we are engaging in a form of problem-solving. However, simple
and complex systems present entirely different types of problems that
require different styles of problem-solving. We can therefore reframe
our earlier discussion of reductionism and complex systems in terms of
the kinds of challenges we can address within each paradigm. We will now
distinguish between three different kinds of challenges—puzzles,
problems, and wicked problems. We will look at the systems that they
tend to arise in, and the different styles of problem-solving we require
to tackle each of them.</p>
<h3 id="puzzles-and-problems">Puzzles and Problems</h3>
<p><strong>Puzzles.</strong> Examples of puzzles include simple
mathematics questions, sudokus, assembling furniture, and fixing a
common issue with a watch mechanism. In all these cases, there is only
one correct result and we are given all the information we need to find
it. We usually find puzzles in simple systems that have been designed by
humans and can be fully understood. These can be solved within the
reductionist paradigm; the systems are simply the sum of their parts,
and we can solve the puzzle by breaking it down into a series of
steps.</p>
<p><strong>Problems.</strong> With problems, we do not always have all
the relevant information upfront, so we might need to investigate to
discover it. This usually gives us a better understanding of what’s
causing the issue, and ideas of solutions often follow naturally from
there. It may turn out that there is more than one approach to fixing
the problem. However, it is clear when the problem is solved and the
system is functioning properly again.<br />
We usually find problems in systems that are complicated, but not
complex. For example, in car repair work, it might not be immediately
apparent what is causing an issue. However, we can investigate to find
out more, and this process often leads us to sensible solutions. Like
puzzles, problems are amenable to the reductionist paradigm, although
they may involve more steps of analysis.</p>
<h3 id="wicked-problems">Wicked Problems</h3>
<p><strong>Wicked problems usually arise in complex systems and often
involve a social element.</strong> Wicked problems are a completely
different class of challenges from puzzles and problems. They appear in
complex systems, with examples including inequality, misinformation, and
climate change. There is also often a social factor involved in wicked
problems, which makes them more difficult to solve. Owing to their
multifaceted nature, wicked problems can be tricky to categorically
define or explain. We will now explore some key features that are
commonly used to characterize them.</p>
<p><strong>There is no single explanation or single solution for a
wicked problem.</strong> We can reasonably interpret a wicked problem as
stemming from more than one possible cause. As such, there is no single
correct solution or even a limited set of eternal possible
solutions.</p>
<p><strong>No proposed solution to a wicked problem is fully right or
wrong, only better or worse.</strong> Since there are usually many
factors involved in a wicked problem, it is difficult to find a perfect
solution that addresses them all. Indeed, such a solution might not
exist. Additionally, due to the many interdependencies in complex
systems, some proposed solutions may have negative side effects and
create other issues, even if they reduce the targeted wicked problem. As
such, we cannot usually find a solution that is fully correct or without
flaw; rather, it is often necessary to look for solutions that work
relatively well with minimal negative side effects.</p>
<p><strong>There is often a risk involved in attempting to solve a
wicked problem.</strong> Since we cannot predict exactly how a complex
system will react to an intervention in advance, we cannot be certain as
to how well a suggested solution will work or whether there will be any
unintended side effects. This means there may be a high cost to
attempting to address wicked problems, as we risk unforeseen
consequences. However, trying out a potential solution is often the only
way of finding out whether it is better or worse.</p>
<p><strong>Every wicked problem is unique because every complex system
is unique.</strong> While we can learn some lessons from other systems
with similar properties, no two systems will respond to our actions in
exactly the same way. This means that we cannot simply transpose a
solution that worked well in one scenario to a different one and expect
it to be just as effective. For example, introducing predators to
control pest numbers has worked well in some situations, but, as we will
discuss in the next section, it has failed in others. This is because
all ecosystems are unique, and the same is true of all complex systems,
meaning that each wicked problem is likely to require a specifically
tailored intervention.</p>
<p><strong>It might not be obvious when a wicked problem has been
solved.</strong> Since wicked problems are often difficult to perfectly
define, it can be challenging to say they have been fully eliminated,
even if they have been greatly reduced. Indeed, since wicked problems
tend to be persistent; it might not be feasible to fully eliminate many
wicked problems at all. Instead, they often require ongoing efforts to
improve the situation, though the ideal scenario may always be beyond
reach.</p>
<p><strong>AI safety is a wicked problem.</strong> Since AI and the
social environments it is deployed within are complex systems, the
issues that arise with its use are likely to be wicked problems. There
may be no obvious solution, and there will probably need to be some
trial and error involved in tackling them. More broadly, the problem of
AI safety in general can be considered a wicked problem. There is no
single correct approach, but many possibilities. We may never be able to
say that we have fully “solved” AI safety; it will require ongoing
efforts.</p>
<p><strong>Summary.</strong> Puzzles and problems usually arise in
relatively simple systems that we can obtain a complete or near-complete
understanding of. We can therefore find all the information we need to
explain the issue and find a solution to it, although problems may be
more complicated, requiring more investigation and steps of analysis
than puzzles.<br />
Wicked problems, on the other hand, arise in complex systems, which are
much more difficult to attain a thorough understanding of. There may be
no single correct explanation for a wicked problem, proposed solutions
may not be fully right or wrong, and it might not be possible to find
out how good they are without trial and error. Every wicked problem is
unique, so solutions that worked well in one system may not always work
in another, even if the systems seem similar, and it might not be
possible to ever definitively say that a wicked problem has been solved.
Owing to the complex nature of the systems involved, AI safety is a
wicked problem.</p>
<h2 id="challenges-with-interventionism"> 5.3.3 Challenges With
Interventionism</h2>
<p>As touched on above, there are usually many potential solutions to
wicked problems, but they may not all work in practice, even if they
sound sensible in theory. We might therefore find that some attempts to
solve wicked problems will be ineffective, have negative side effects,
or even backfire. Complex systems have so many interdependencies that
when we try to adjust one aspect of them, we can inadvertently affect
others. For this reason, we should approach AI safety with more humility
and more awareness of the limits of our knowledge than if we were trying
to fix a watch or a washing machine. We will now look at some examples
of historical interventions in complex systems that have not gone to
plan. In many cases, they have done more harm than good.</p>
<p><strong>Cane toads in Australia.</strong> Sugarcane is grown in
Australia as a valuable product in the economy, but a species of insect
called the cane beetle is known to feed on sugarcane crops and destroy
them. In the 1930s, cane toads were introduced in Australia to prey on
these beetles, with the hope of minimizing crop losses. However, since
cane toads are not native to Australia, they have no natural predators
there. In fact, the toads are toxic to many native species and have
damaged ecosystems by poisoning animals that have eaten them. The cane
toads have multiplied rapidly and are considered an invasive species.
Attempts to control their numbers have so far been largely
unsuccessful.</p>
<p><strong>Warning signs on roads.</strong> Road accidents are a
long-standing and pervasive issue. A widely used intervention is to
display signs along roads with information about the numbers of crashes
and fatalities that have happened in the surrounding area that year. The
idea is that this information should encourage people to drive more
carefully. However, one study has found that signs like this increase
the number of accidents and fatalities, possibly because they distract
drivers from the road.</p>
<p><strong>Renewable Heat Incentive Scandal.</strong> In 2012, a
government department in Northern Ireland wanted to boost the fraction
of energy consumption from renewable sources. To this end, they set up
an initiative offering businesses generous subsidies for using renewable
heating sources, such as wood pellets. However, in trying to reach their
percentage targets for renewable energy, the politicians offered a
subsidy that was slightly more than the cost of the wood pellets. This
incentivized businesses to use more energy than they needed and profit
from the subsidies. There were reports of people burning pellets to heat
empty buildings unnecessarily. The episode became known as the “Cash for
Ash scandal”.</p>
<p><strong>Barbados-Grenada football match.</strong> In the 1994
Caribbean Cup, an international football tournament, organizers
introduced a new rule to reduce the likelihood of ties, which they
thought were less exciting. The rule was that if two teams were tied at
the end of the allotted 90 minutes, the match would go to extra time,
and any goal scored in extra time would be worth double. The idea was to
incentivize the players to try harder to score. However, in a match
between Barbados and Grenada, Barbados needed to win by two goals to
advance to the tournament finals. The score as they approached 90
minutes was 2-1 to Barbados. This resulted in a strange situation where
Barbados players tried to score an own goal to push the match into extra
time and have an opportunity to win by two.</p>
<p><strong>Summary.</strong> Interventions that work in theory might
fail in a complex system. In all these examples, an intervention was
attempted to solve a problem in a complex system. In theory, each
intervention seemed like it should work, but each decision-maker’s
theory did not capture all the complexities of the system at hand.
Therefore, when each intervention was applied, the system reacted in
unexpected ways, leaving the original problem unsolved, and often
creating additional problems that might be even worse.</p>
<h3 id="stable-states-and-restoring-forces">Stable States and Restoring
Forces</h3>
<p>The examples above illustrate how complex systems can react
unexpectedly to interventions. This can be partly attributed to the
properties of self-organization and adaptive behavior; complex systems
can organize themselves around new conditions in unobvious ways, without
necessarily addressing the reason for the intervention. Some
interventions might partially solve the original problem but unleash
unanticipated side effects that are not considered worth the benefits.
Other interventions, however, might completely backfire, exacerbating
the very problem they were intended to solve. We will now discuss the
concept of “stable states” and how they might explain complex systems’
tendency to resist attempts to change them.</p>
<p><strong>If a complex system is in a stable state, it is likely to
resist attempts to change it.</strong> If a ball is sitting in a valley
between two hills and we kick it up one hill, gravity will pull it back
to the valley. Similarly, if a complex system has found a stable state,
there might be some “restoring forces” or homeostatic processes that
will keep drawing it back toward that state, even if we try to pull it
in a different direction.</p>
<p>Another analogy is Le Chatelier’s Principle, a well-known concept in
chemistry. The principle concerns chemical equilibria, in which the
concentrations of different chemicals stay the same over time. There may
be chemical reactions happening, converting some chemicals into others,
but the rate of any reaction will equal the rate of its opposite
reaction. The total concentration of each chemical therefore remains
unchanged, hence the term equilibrium.<br />
Le Chatelier’s Principle states that if we introduce a change to a
system in chemical equilibrium, the system will shift to a new
equilibrium in a way that partly opposes that change. For example, if we
increase the concentration of one chemical, then the rate of the
reaction using up that chemical will increase, using up more of it and
reducing the extra amount present. Similarly, complex systems sometimes
react against our interferences in them.<br />
We will now look at some examples of interventions backfiring in complex
systems. We will explore how we might think of these systems as having
stable states and restoring forces that draw the system back toward its
stable state if an intervention tries to pull it away. Note that the
following discussions of what the stable states and restoring forces
might be are largely speculative. Although these hypotheses have not
been rigorously proven to explain these examples, they are intended to
show how we can view systems and failed interventions through the lens
of stable states and restoring forces.</p>
<p><strong>Rules to restrict driving.</strong> In 1989, to tackle high
traffic and air pollution levels in Mexico City, the government launched
an initiative called “Hoy No Circula.” The program introduced rules that
allowed people to drive only on certain days of the week, depending on
the last number on their license plate. This initially led to a drop in
emissions, but they soon rose again, actually surpassing the
pre-intervention levels. A study found that the rules had incentivized
people to buy additional cars so they could drive on more days.
Moreover, the extra cars people bought tended to be cheaper, older, more
polluting ones, exacerbating the pollution problem <span
class="citation" data-cites="davis2008effect"></span>.<br />
We could perhaps interpret this situation as having a stable state in
terms of how much driving people wanted or needed to do. When rules were
introduced to try to reduce it, people looked for ways to circumvent
them. We could view this as a restoring force in the system.</p>
<p><strong>Four Pests campaign.</strong> In 1958, the Chinese leader Mao
Zedong launched a campaign encouraging people to kill the “four pests”:
flies, mosquitoes, rodents, and sparrows. The first three were targeted
for spreading disease, but sparrows were considered a pest because they
were believed to eat grain and reduce crop yields. During this campaign,
sparrows were killed intensively and their populations plummeted.
However, as well as grain, sparrows also eat locusts. In the absence of
a natural predator, locust populations rose sharply, destroying more
crops than the sparrows did <span class="citation"
data-cites="steinfeld2018china"></span>. Although many factors were at
play, including poor weather and officials’ decisions about food
distribution <span class="citation"
data-cites="meng2015institutional"></span>, this ecosystem imbalance is
often considered a contributing factor in the Great Chinese Famine <span
class="citation" data-cites="steinfeld2018china"></span>, during which
tens of millions of people starved between 1959 and 1961.<br />
Ecosystems are highly complex, with intricate balances between the
populations of many species. We could think of agricultural systems as
having a “stable state” that naturally involves some crops being lost to
wildlife. If we try to reduce these losses simply by eliminating one
species, then another might take advantage of the available crops
instead, acting as a kind of restoring force.</p>
<p><strong>Antibiotic resistance.</strong> Bacterial infections have
been a cause of illness and mortality in humans throughout history. In
September 1928, bacteriologist Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin,
the first antibiotic. Over the following years, the methods for
producing it were refined, and, by the end of World War II, there was a
large supply available for use in the US and Britain. This was a huge
medical advancement, offering a cure for many common causes of death,
such as pneumonia and tuberculosis. Death rates due to bacterial
illnesses dropped dramatically <span class="citation"
data-cites="Gottfried2005history"></span>; it is estimated that, in
1952, in the US, around 150,000 fewer people died from bacterial
illnesses than would have without antibiotics. In the early 2000s, it
was estimated that antibiotics may have been saving around 200,000 lives
annually in the US alone.<br />
However, as antibiotics have become more abundantly used, bacteria have
begun to evolve resistance to these vital medicines. Today, many
bacterial illnesses, including pneumonia and tuberculosis, are once
again becoming difficult to treat due to the declining effectiveness of
antibiotics. In 2019, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
reported that antimicrobial-resistant bacteria are responsible for over
35,000 deaths per year in the US <span class="citation"
data-cites="cdc2019antibiotic"></span>.<br />
In this case, we might think of the coexistence of humans and pathogens
as having a stable state, involving some infections and deaths. While
antibiotics have reduced deaths due to bacteria over the past decades,
we could view natural selection as a “restoring force”, driving the
evolution of bacteria to become resistant and causing deaths to rise
again. Overuse of these medicines intensifies selective pressures and
accelerates the process.<br />
In this case, it is worth noting that antibiotics have been a monumental
advancement in healthcare, and we do not argue that they should not be
used or that they are a failed intervention. Rather, this example
highlights the tendency of complex systems to react against measures
over time, even if they were initially highly successful.</p>
<p><strong>Instead of pushing a system in a desired direction, we could
try to shift the stable states.</strong> If an intervention attempts to
artificially hold a system away from its stable state, it might be as
unproductive as repeatedly kicking a ball up a hill to keep it away from
a valley. Metaphorically speaking, if we want the ball to sit in a
different place, a more effective approach would be to change the
landscape so that the valley is where we want the ball to be. The ball
will then settle there without our help. More generally, we want to
change the stable points of the system itself, if possible, so that it
naturally reaches a state that is more in line with our desired
outcomes.</p>
<p><strong>Good cycling infrastructure may shift the stable states of
how much people drive.</strong> One example of shifting stable states is
the construction of cycling infrastructure in the Netherlands in the
1970s. As cars became cheaper during the 20th century, the number of
people who owned them began to rise in many countries, including the
Netherlands. Alongside this, the number of car accidents also increased.
In the 1970s, a protest movement gathered in response to rising numbers
of children being killed by cars. The campaign succeeded in convincing
Dutch politicians to build extensive cycling infrastructure to encourage
people to travel by bike instead of by car. This has had positive,
lasting results. A 2018 report stated that around 27% of all trips in
the Netherlands are made by bike—a higher proportion than any other
country studied <span class="citation"
data-cites="harms2018cycling"></span>.<br />
Instead of making rules to try to limit how much people drive, creating
appropriate infrastructure makes cycling safer and easier. Additionally,
well-planned cycle networks can make many routes quicker by bike than by
car, making this option more convenient. Under these conditions, people
will naturally be more inclined to cycle, so society naturally drifts
toward a stable point that entails less driving.<br />
It is worth noting that the Netherlands’ success might not be possible
to replicate everywhere, as there may be other factors involved. For
instance, the terrain in the Netherlands is relatively flat compared
with other countries, and hilly terrain might dissuade people from
cycling. This illustrates that some factors influencing the stable
points are beyond our control. Nevertheless, this approach has likely
been more effective in the Netherlands than simple rules limiting
driving would have been. There might also be other effective strategies
for changing the stable points of how much people drive, such as
creating cheap, reliable public transport systems.</p>
<p><strong>Summary.</strong> Complex systems can often self-organize
into stable states that we may consider undesirable, and which create
some kind of environmental or social problem. However, if we try to
solve the problem too simplistically by trying to pull the system away
from its stable state, we might expect some restoring forces to
circumvent our intervention and bring the system back to its stable
state, or an even worse one. A more effective approach might be to
change certain underlying conditions within a system, where possible, to
create new, more desirable stable states for the system to self-organize
toward.</p>
<h3 id="successful-interventions">Successful Interventions</h3>
<p>We have discussed several examples of failed interventions in complex
systems. While it can be difficult to say definitively a wicked problem
has been solved, there are some examples of interventions that have
clearly been at least partially successful. We will now look at some of
these examples.</p>
<p><strong>Eradication of Smallpox.</strong> In 1967, the WHO launched
an intensive campaign against smallpox, involving intensive global
vaccination programs and close monitoring and containment of outbreaks.
In 1980, the WHO declared that smallpox had been eradicated. This was an
enormous feat that required concerted international efforts over more
than a decade.</p>
<p><strong>Reversal of the depletion of the ozone layer</strong>. Toward
the end of the 20th century it was discovered that certain compounds
frequently used in spray cans, refrigerators, and air conditioners, were
reaching the ozone layer and depleting it, leading to more harmful
radiation passing through. As a result, the Montreal Protocol, an
international agreement to phase out the use of these compounds, was
negotiated in 1987 and enacted soon after. It has been reported that the
ozone layer has started to recover since then.</p>
<p><strong>Public health campaigns against smoking.</strong> In the 20th
century, scientists discovered a causal relationship between tobacco
smoking and lung cancer. In the following decades, governments started
implementing various measures to discourage people from smoking.
Initiatives have included health warnings on cigarette packets, smoking
bans in certain public areas, and programs supporting people through the
process of quitting. Many of these measures have successfully raised
public awareness of health risks and contributed to declining smoking
rates in several countries.<br />
While these examples show that it is possible to address wicked
problems, they also demonstrate some of the difficulties involved. All
these interventions have required enormous, sustained efforts over many
years, and some have involved coordination on a global scale. It is
worth noting that smallpox is the only infectious disease that has ever
been eradicated. One challenge in replicating this success elsewhere is
that some viruses, such as influenza viruses, evolve rapidly to evade
vaccine-induced immunity. This highlights how unique each wicked problem
is.<br />
Campaigns to dissuade people from smoking have faced pushback from the
tobacco industry, showing how conflicting incentives in complex systems
can hamper attempts to solve wicked problems. Additionally, as is often
the case with wicked problems, we may never be able to say that smoking
is fully “solved”; it might not be feasible to reach a situation where
no one smokes at all. Nonetheless, much positive progress has been made
in tackling this issue.</p>
<p><strong>Summary.</strong> Although it is by no means straightforward
to tackle wicked problems, there are some examples of interventions that
have successfully solved or made great strides toward solving certain
wicked problems. For many wicked problems, it may never be possible to
say that they have been fully solved, but it is nonetheless possible to
make progress and improve the situation.</p>
<h2 id="systemic-issues"> 5.3.4 Systemic Issues</h2>
<p>We have discussed the characteristics of wicked problems as stemming
from the complex systems they arise from, and explored why they are so
difficult to tackle. We have also looked at some examples of failed
attempts to solve wicked problems, as well as examples of more
successful ones, and explored the idea of shifting stable points,
instead of just trying to pull a system away from its stable points. We
will now discuss ways of thinking more holistically and identifying more
effective, system-level solutions.</p>
<p><strong>Obvious problems are sometimes just symptoms of broader
systemic issues.</strong> It can be tempting to take action at the level
of the obvious, tangible problem, but this is sometimes like applying a
band-aid. If there is a broader underlying issue, then trying to fix the
problem directly might only work temporarily, and more problems might
continue to crop up.</p>
<p><strong>We should think about the function we are trying to achieve
and the system we are using.</strong> One method of finding more
effective solutions is to “zoom out” and consider the situation
holistically. This might involve thinking carefully about what function
we are trying to achieve, the system we are using, and whether it is
well designed for its purpose. We should consider whether, if we solve
the immediate problem, another one might be likely to arise soon
after.</p>
<p><strong>It might be more fruitful to change AI research culture than
address individual issues.</strong> One approach to AI safety might be
to address issues with individual products as they come up. This
approach would be focused on the level of the problem. However, if
issues keep arising, it could be a sign of broader underlying issues
with how research is being done. It might therefore be better to
influence the culture around AI research and development, instead of
focusing on individual risks. If multiple organizations developing AI
technology are in an arms race with one another, for example, they will
be trying to reach goals and release products as quickly as possible.
This will likely compel people to cut corners, perhaps by omitting
safety measures. Reducing these competitive pressures might therefore
significantly reduce overall risk, albeit less directly.<br />
If competitive pressures remain high, we could imagine a potential
future scenario in which a serious AI-related safety issue materializes
and causes considerable harm. In explaining this accident, people might
focus on the exact series of events that led to it—which product was
involved, who developed it, and what precisely went wrong. However,
ignoring the role of competitive pressures would be an oversight. We can
illustrate this difference in mindset more clearly by looking at
historical examples.</p>
<p><strong>We can explain catastrophes by looking for a “root cause” or
looking at systemic factors.</strong> There are usually two ways of
interpreting a catastrophe. We can either look for a traceable series of
events that triggered it, or we can think more about the surrounding
conditions that made it likely to happen one way or another. For
instance, the first approach might say that the assassination of Franz
Ferdinand caused World War One. While that event may have been the
spark, international tensions were already high beforehand. If the
assassination had not happened, something else might have done, also
triggering a conflict. A better approach might instead invoke the
imperialistic ambitions of many nations and the development of new
militaristic technologies, which led nations to believe there was a
strong first-strike advantage.<br />
We can also find the contrast between these two mindsets in the
different explanations put forward for the Bhopal gas tragedy, a huge
leak of toxic gas that happened in December 1984 at a
pesticide-producing plant in Bhopal, India. The disaster caused
thousands of deaths and injured up to half a million people. A “root
cause” explanation blames workers for allowing water to get into some of
the pipes, where it set off an uncontrolled reaction with other
chemicals that escalated to catastrophe. However, a more holistic view
focuses on the slipping safety standards in the run-up to the event,
during which management failed to adequately maintain safety systems and
ensure that employees were properly trained. According to this view, an
accident was bound to happen as a result of these factors, regardless of
the specific way in which it started.</p>
<p><strong>To improve safety in complex systems, we should focus on
general systemic factors.</strong> Both examples above took place in
complex systems; the network of changing relationships between nations
constitutes a complex evolving system, as does the system of operations
in a large industrial facility. As we have discussed, complex systems
are difficult to predict and we cannot analyze and guard against every
possible way in which something might go wrong. Trying to change the
broad systemic factors to influence a system’s general safety may be
much more effective. In the development of technology, including AI,
competitive pressures are one important systemic risk source. Others
include regulations, public concern, safety costs, and safety culture.
We will discuss these and other systemic factors in more depth in the
chapter.</p>
<p><strong>Summary.</strong> Instead of just focusing on the most
obvious, surface-level problem, we should also consider what function we
are trying to achieve, the system we are using, and whether the problem
might be a result of a mismatch between the system and our goal.
Thinking in this way can help us identify systemic factors underlying
the problems and ways of changing them so that the system is better
suited to achieving our aims.</p>
